# Session lifecycle

VerneMQ provides multiple hooks throughout the lifetime of a session. The most
important ones are the `auth_on_register` and `auth_on_register_m5` hooks which
act as an application level firewall granting or rejecting new clients.

![](../.gitbook/assets/session_lifecycle.svg)


### auth\_on\_register and auth\_on\_register\_m5

The `auth_on_register` and `auth_on_register_m5` hooks allow your plugin to
grant or reject new client connections. Moreover it lets you exert fine grained
control over the configuration of the client session. The `auth_on_register`
hook is specified in the Erlang behaviour
[auth_on_register_hook](https://github.com/vernemq/vernemq_dev/blob/master/src/auth_on_register_hook.erl)
and the `auth_on_register_m5` hook in the
[auth_on_register_m5_hook](https://github.com/vernemq/vernemq_dev/blob/master/src/auth_on_register_m5_hook.erl)
behaviour available in the [vernemq_dev](https://github.com/vernemq/vernemq_dev)
repo.

Every plugin that implements the `auth_on_register` or `auth_on_register_m5`
hooks are part of a conditional plugin chain. For this reason we allow the hook
to return different values depending on how the plugin grants or rejects this
client. In case the plugin doesn't know the client it is best to return `next`
as this would allow subsequent plugins in the chain to validate this client. If
no plugin is able to validate the client it gets automatically rejected.

### on_auth_m5

The `on_auth_m5` hook allows your plugin to implement MQTT enhanced
authentication, see [Enhanced Authentication Flow](./enhancedauthflow.md).

### on\_register and on\_register\_m5

The `on_register` and `on_register_m5` hooks allow your plugin to get informed
about a newly authenticated client. The hook is specified in the Erlang
behaviour
[on_register_hook](https://github.com/vernemq/vernemq_dev/blob/master/src/on_register_hook.erl)
and the
[on_register_m5_hook](https://github.com/vernemq/vernemq_dev/blob/master/src/on_register_m5_hook.erl)
behaviour available in the [vernemq_dev](https://github.com/vernemq/vernemq_dev)
repo.

### on\_client\_wakeup

Once a new client was successfully authenticated and the above described hooks
have been called, the client attaches to its queue. If it is a returning client
using `clean_session=false` or if the client had previous sessions in the
cluster, this process could take a while. \(As offline messages are migrated to
a new node, existing sessions are disconnected\). The
[on_client_wakeup](https://github.com/vernemq/vernemq_dev/blob/master/src/on_client_wakeup_hook.erl)
hook is called at the point where a queue has been successfully instantiated,
possible offline messages migrated, and potential duplicate sessions have been
disconnected. In other words: when the client has reached a completely
initialized, normal state for accepting messages. The hook is specified in the
Erlang behaviour `on_client_wakeup_hook` available in the
[vernemq_dev](https://github.com/vernemq/vernemq_dev) repo.

### on\_client\_offline

This hook is called if a client using `clean_session=false` closes the
connection or gets disconnected by a duplicate client. The hook is specified in
the Erlang behaviour
[on_client_offline_hook](https://github.com/vernemq/vernemq_dev/blob/master/src/on_client_offline_hook.erl)
available in the [vernemq_dev](https://github.com/vernemq/vernemq_dev) repo.

### on\_client\_gone

This hook is called if a client using `clean_session=true` closes the connection
or gets disconnected by a duplicate client. The hook is specified in the Erlang
behaviour
[on_client_gone_hook](https://github.com/vernemq/vernemq_dev/blob/master/src/on_client_gone_hook.erl)
available in the [vernemq_dev](https://github.com/vernemq/vernemq_dev) repo.

